JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH: SPACE PHYSICS, VOL. 118, 6558–6587, doi:10.1002/jgra.50537, 2013

Mars ionospheric response to solar wind variability
H. J. Opgenoorth,1,2,3 D. J. Andrews,1 M. Fränz,3 M. Lester,4 N. J. T. Edberg,1
D. Morgan,5 F. Duru,5 O. Witasse,6 and A. O. Williams 4
Received 20 March 2013; revised 19 August 2013; accepted 23 August 2013; published 3 October 2013.

[1] At planets with induced magnetospheres, the coupling between the ionosphere, the

weak draped magnetosphere, and the solar wind is very direct in comparison to Earth. The
weak induced magnetosphere itself is created by the prevailing Solar wind conditions and
therefore in its shape and strength dynamically depending on it. In early 2010, Mars was
located behind Earth in the Solar wind; thus, we can use coordinated data from multiple
near-Earth spacecraft (Stereo, Wind) to evaluate what kind of Solar wind disturbances have
passed by Earth and might consecutively hit Mars, and when. We employ plasma data from
the ESA Mars-Express mission, the ASPERA-3 particle instrument, and the MARSIS
Active Ionospheric Sounder (AIS) to investigate, for a number of isolated events in March
and April 2010, how the ionosphere and the induced magnetosphere at Mars develop and
decay in response to Solar wind variability in the magnetic ﬁeld, density, and velocity. In a
dedicated campaign mode, we use frequent long-duration MARSIS AIS operations for
several consecutive orbits, to monitor for the ﬁrst time the long-term development of the
Martian plasma environment during solar wind disturbances. We ﬁnd that the
magnetosphere and ionosphere of Mars can become considerably compressed by solar wind
dynamic pressure variations, which usually are also associated with changes in the magnetic
draping of the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld around the planet. These are typically associated
with corotating interaction regions and coronal mass ejections, and can last for several days.
During such episodes of compression, we see signatures of increased plasma transport over
the terminator and enhanced ion outﬂow from the upper atmosphere.
Citation: Opgenoorth, H. J., D. J. Andrews, M. Fränz, M. Lester, N. J. T. Edberg, D. Morgan, F. Duru, O. Witasse, and
A. O. Williams (2013), Mars ionospheric response to solar wind variability, J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics, 118, 6558–6587,
doi:10.1002/jgra.50537.

1.

Introduction

[2] Planets or planet-like bodies without intrinsic magnetic
ﬁelds are considered to lose considerable fractions of their
atmosphere in a more or less permanent dynamic process of
erosion occurring in the interaction between the ionized
upper atmosphere and the ﬂowing solar wind plasma (or in
the case of moons, the plasma ﬂow in the host planet’s magnetosphere). In the case of Mars, this atmospheric ion loss
has been estimated to be of the order of 0.05–0.5 kg s1 or
1023–1024 ions s1 [see, e.g., Barabash et al., 2007; Lundin
et al., 2008a; Edberg et al., 2010; Nilsson et al., 2010, and

1

Swedish Institute of Space Physics, Uppsala, Sweden.
International Space Science Institute, ISSI, Bern, Switzerland.
3
Max-Planck-Inst. f. Sonnensystemforschung, Katlenburg-Lindau,
Germany.
4
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leicester,
Leicester, UK.
5
Department of Physics, University of Iowa, Iowa, USA.
6
ESA/STEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands.
2

Corresponding author: H. J. Opgenoorth, Swedish Institute of Space
Physics, Box 537, SE 751 21 Uppsala, Sweden. (opg@irfu.se)
©2013. American Geophysical Union. All Rights Reserved.
2169-9380/13/10.1002/jgra.50537

references therein]. Several potential loss processes such as
bulk ion loss, ionospheric ion outﬂow, and solar wind pickup
have been advocated, which all are associated with direct
solar wind forcing. Thermal processes have played a dominant role in the early life of the planet Mars. They are probably now much less dominant, except in the case of hydrogen
escape, but still comparable to present day nonthermal loss
processes [Lammer et al., 2013].
[3] However, a few studies concerning the inﬂuence of solar wind variability, in particular solar wind dynamic pressure changes caused by changes either in plasma density,
velocity, or both, have shown that the intensity of the outﬂow
is strongly dependent on such solar wind parameters. Lundin
et al. [2008b] have shown that the outﬂow rate is dependent
on both solar wind dynamic pressure and the EUV/XEUV
ﬂux. Futaana et al. [2008] showed that a burst of Solar
Energetic Particles (SEP) associated with a coronal mass
ejection (CME) caused a short-lived rise of the atmospheric
escape rate at Mars by a factor of 10. Results of these studies
have been reviewed by Dubinin et al. [2011].
[4] However, such studies of direct solar wind trigger of
outﬂow events at Mars are rare, as there is no readily
available upstream solar wind monitor at Mars, which could
provide information on the state of the solar wind, while lowaltitude Mars orbiting satellites measure these substantial

6558

OPGENOORTH ET AL.: MARS IONOSPHERIC RESPONSE

Figure 1. The trajectories of Earth (E, green), Mars (M, red),
and Stereo (blue, A-ahead and B-behind Earth) as colored
dashed lines in “Heliocentric inertial” coordinates from 1
March 2010 to 1 May 2010. Colored solid circles indicate the
position of the respective planet or spacecraft at the start of this
interval, while the solid circular segments indicate their motion
to the end of the interval. Black dotted and dashed lines show
sets of nominal Parker spirals corresponding to fast (600 km s1)
and slow (300 km s1) solar wind streams, respectively. The
orange-shaded region indicates the area swept out by Parker
spirals which intersect the orbit of Earth, corresponding to
the average solar wind speed measured by Wind during the
whole interval, ~ 420 km s1. Furthermore, the blue-shaded
areas in this ﬁgure demark the STEREO-A Secchi HI ﬁelds
of view from Sun to Earth (and Mars) at the beginning and
the end of the campaign period, as used in Figure 2.
changes in the energies of the relevant plasma populations
inside the bow shock (BS) (i.e., within the heated
magnetosheath plasma of the induced magnetosphere) and
within the magnetic pileup boundary (MPB) (i.e., within
the colder and typically less dense planetary ionosphere).
To overcome the absence of a dedicated upstream solar wind
monitor at Mars, Nilsson et al. [2010] used the combined data
set of ESA’s Mars Express (MEX) and NASA’s Mars Global
Surveyor (MGS) in a statistical study, conﬁrming the dependence of observed ionospheric outﬂow rates, observed by the
former, to solar wind variations of dynamic pressure, observed by the latter. In a ﬁrst detailed event study, Dubinin
et al. [2009] investigated the effects on the Martian ionosphere for one clear corotating interaction region (CIR)
event, which resulted in a major scavenging of the Martian
ionosphere and an increase in the ion outﬂow by a factor of
10. In this special case occurring in February 2008, Mars
was located just behind Earth along the solar wind Parker spiral, and thus solar wind data at Earth (from the ACE spacecraft) could be used to predict the impact of a CIR at Mars
(see our own campaign description below). They interpreted
detailed observations of ionospheric plasma heating by the
ASPERA-3 and MARSIS instruments on MEX (see

more detailed instrument description and references below)
as a consequence of plasma penetration from the hot
magnetosheath plasma to inside the MPB, leading to signiﬁcant particle acceleration and bulk ion outﬂow for only a few
