Introduction Space weather effects on ground‐based technology have occurred since the first telegraph lines started their operation [ Barlow , ; Boteler et al. , ]. Since the construction of high‐voltage power grids, geomagnetically induced currents (GIC) have been recognized as a quasi‐direct current (DC) phenomenon interfering with the normal alternating current (AC) power transmission [ McNish , ; Molinski , ]. In extreme cases, GIC have even caused blackouts, such as in Canada in March 1989 [ Bolduc , ] or in Sweden in 2003 [ Pulkkinen et al. , ]. Due to the increasing dependence of modern society on reliable power transmission, much interest has recently been paid to extreme space weather events and related GIC. One approach is to assess the size of rare events based on long‐term statistics derived from geomagnetic measurements [ Thomson et al. , ; Pulkkinen et al. , ; Beggan et al. , ; Ngwira et al. , ; Myllys et al. , ]. Another method is to use measured or estimated data of major solar wind events and simulate their effects on the ground [ Ngwira et al. , , ]. It is also possible to derive empirical relations between parameters of the solar wind or magnetosphere and ground disturbances [ Pulkkinen et al. , ]. GIC is primarily driven by the geoelectric field induced at the Earth's surface during intense geomagnetic variations [ Pirjola , ]. As Faraday's law of induction implies, the electric field is in turn related to temporal variations of the ground magnetic field. Their primary sources are ionospheric and magnetospheric currents. This 3‐D current system can be replaced by an equivalent current sheet at the ionospheric altitude, and it can be determined from the measured ground magnetic field [ Amm and Viljanen , ]. In this study, we use a 20 year time series of equivalent ionospheric currents derived from the measurements of the International Monitor for Auroral Geomagnetic Effects (IMAGE) magnetometer network [ Tanskanen , ] in Northern Europe. We analyze the results with emphasis on extreme cases. Thinking of GIC as an application, we concentrate on the analysis of the time derivative of the equivalent currents. An ionospheric equivalent current map is basically a representation of combined ground magnetic field data from several stations. Such a representation is often easier to interpret and compare with other observations [e.g., Weygand et al. , ; Juusola et al. , ] than “raw” data from individual magnetometers. However, understanding the strengths and limitations of the representation is important. A contribution to this understanding is why we have chosen to use ionospheric equivalent currents in this study instead of ground magnetic field data. As reference data, we use (a) modeled GIC in the European high‐voltage power grid derived from 13 years of data [ Viljanen et al. , ] and (b) magnetic measurements from the Nurmijärvi observatory (magnetic latitude ∼57°) covering a 39 year period. The latter time series gives a longer‐term perspective to the conclusions derived from the 20 year set of equivalent currents. The structure of the paper is as follows: we will start by introducing the data ( ), then show and discuss the results ( ), and summarize the conclusions ( ). Data We have used 10 s vector magnetic field data ( B x —positive north, B y —positive east) from the IMAGE magnetometer network from 1994 to 2013. The disturbance magnetic field attributed to the ionospheric equivalent currents was obtained by subtracting a baseline from the measured field using the method of van de Kamp [ ]. In this method, the baseline consists of three components: (1) A “jump baseline,” which contains the spikes and jumps found in some of the data, due to equipment effects. These are detected semiautomatically and checked manually. (2) A long‐term baseline, which follows long‐term trends, such as seasonal and tidal variations, as well as equipment drift. This is obtained by linear interpolation between the daily median values of the data. The daily median values are calculated for all days except the most disturbed ones. (3) A diurnal baseline, following the daily Sq or solar quiet and L or lunar variations. These are obtained by linear interpolation between curves which are made up of the lowest seven harmonics of the diurnal variations on quiet days. This method ensures a smooth baseline at all times, avoiding any discontinuities at transitions between days. The dates of the quiet days are detected, for each magnetometer station separately, as the day of each month where the fast fluctuations (variations of time scales smaller than 1 h) are smallest. The baseline is derived from the ground magnetic field data from each magnetometer station separately, and for the B x and B y field components separately, as a superposition of the three baseline parts mentioned above. The locations of the magnetometers were converted from geographic latitude and longitude and universal time (UT) to altitude‐adjusted corrected geomagnetic (AACGM) latitude and longitude [ Baker and Wing , ] and magnetic local time (MLT), and B x and B y were rotated from geographic to geomagnetic dipole coordinates. The 2‐D Spherical Elementary Current System (SECS) method [ Amm , ; Amm and Viljanen , ] was used to derive ionospheric equivalent current maps from the disturbance magnetic field. The equivalent current density map at 100 km altitude for each UT epoch ( J eq ( t )) was computed on a grid extending from 54.0° to 75.6° in latitude with a resolution of 0.6° and from 85.4° to 116.2° in longitude with a resolution of 1.4°. The time derivative of the equivalent current density for each UT epoch ( t ) was calculated by subtracting the map of the subsequent epoch ( t + 10 s) from the map of the previous epoch ( t − 10 s): |Δ J eq |/Δ t =| J eq ( t + 10 s) − J eq ( t − 10 s)|/20s. The advantage of this approach as opposed to subtracting the maps from two successive epochs is that no interpolation of data is needed to obtain maps of |Δ J eq |/Δ t at the same epochs as the maps of J eq . As an example, Figure shows a snapshot of J eq ( t ) (arrows) and |Δ J eq |/Δ t (color) at 100 km altitude derived from IMAGE data as a function of AACGM latitude and longitude on 15 December 2000 at 02:07:00 UT. |Δ J eq |/Δ t is only shown for grid points within 200 km horizontal distance from the closest operational magnetometer, indicated by the white squares (a list of all IMAGE stations, their coordinates, and data availability can be found at ). The event occurred during a storm caused by a large halo coronal mass ejection [ Liu et al. , ], and both the equivalent current density and its time derivative display exceptionally high values. At 02:07:00 UT, the AACGM longitudes of the map correspond approximately to MLT hours 03–05. The map has been rotated such that the orientation illustrates the concurrent MLTs, with noon at the top, dusk to the left, midnight at the bottom, and dawn to the right. For the analysis in the later sections, the latitude, MLT, and value of the maximum |Δ J eq |/Δ t were extracted from each instantaneous equivalent current map. Only grid points within 200 km horizontal distance from the closest magnetometer were considered. The value 200 km was chosen because visual inspection of maps such as the example in Figure showed it to exclude the regions clearly not covered by observations while still allowing for some overlap between the “fields of view” of neighboring stations. To assess the long‐term validity of the |Δ J eq |/Δ t statistics based on the years 1994–2013, we considered measurements of the magnetic field at the Nurmijärvi (NUR) observatory in 1975–2013. One‐minute values of the field are available at about 98% of all time steps, the longest gap being in October 1979 to March 1980. Values are given at an accuracy of 1 nT in 1975–1977, after which the accuracy is 0.1 nT. The D s t index [ Sugiura , ] at 1 h resolution and the K p index [ Bartels et al. , ] at 3 h resolution were obtained from the World Data Center for Geomagnetism, Kyoto ( ). Results Occurrence of Extreme Time Derivatives of the Equivalent Current Density Figure a shows the probability density of 10 s maximum |Δ J eq |/Δ t values. The smallest, median, and largest observed value are indicated at the top of Figure a. We define disturbance categories 1–6 (first column in Table ) so that category N contains the 100% ·10 − N top percentage of the data set, as shown in the second column of Table . The third column shows the approximate |Δ J eq |/Δ t values exceeded for the percentages listed in the second column. The threshold values of all categories are also shown as the vertical colored lines in Figure a. Category 0 in Table includes all values for reference. The most extreme category‐6 days are listed in Table . By a category‐6 day we mean a day during which at least one |Δ J eq |/Δ t value belonged to the top 0.0001% of the data set. Thus, the number of category‐6 days in Table (26) is smaller than the number of occurrences (64) or uninterrupted sequences (42) in Table . Most of the days in Table belong to well‐known storms. For example, the days 29–30 October 2003 are associated with the Halloween storm [e.g., Gopalswamy et al. , ; Richardson et al. , ] and 15 December 2006 (Figure ) with a storm caused by a large halo coronal mass ejection [ Liu et al. , ]. Out of the 22 category‐6 days that occurred in 1996–2006, 12 agree with the intense ( D s t <− 100 nT) magnetic storms identified by Echer et al. [ ]. Viljanen et al. [ ] list the most active GIC days in 1996–2008 in the European high‐voltage power grid according to the daily maximum of the modeled 1min GIC averaged over all nodes. Using the same data, we have compiled Table . The first two columns list the rank and date of top 40 GIC days in Northern Europe (Nordic countries north of Copenhagen, about 52°–68° AACGM latitude). If the date is found on the South and Central European (<52° AACGM latitude) top 40 GIC days list, the corresponding rank is listed in the third column of Table . The fourth column lists the category of the top |Δ J eq |/Δ t during the day. Figure b shows the number of continuous sequences of values in each disturbance category longer than or equal to the sequence length on the x axis. The number of uninterrupted sequences and the start time and duration of the longest uninterrupted sequence for each category are listed in columns 6–8 of Table . Naturally, the higher the category the shorter the sequences are, with the most disturbed category‐6 sequences only lasting a few tens of seconds. For categories 2–5, the longest uninterrupted sequences occurred during intense magnetic storms identified by Echer et al. [ ]. The minimum D s t of the storm associated with the longest uninterrupted category‐6 sequence was −91 nT, which did not quite fulfill the criterion for an intense storm. Furthermore, there are three category‐6 days in Table with D s t >− 40 nT and seven with D s t >− 60 nT, which indicates that D s t may not be a comprehensive (or even good) indicator of intense regional |Δ J eq |/Δ t activity. However, all category‐6 days in Table but one (event number 24) had K p ≥5, which typically carries a “storm time” designation. The diurnal distribution of |Δ J eq |/Δ t in each disturbance category is shown in Figure c. Each value in the plot corresponds to ±0.5h around the indicated UT hour. The distribution of the weakest category‐1 values has two peaks, one at 06 UT (MLT ≈UT+2 h) and one at 21 UT. For the stronger events (categories >1), both the premidnight and postmidnight maximum shifts to earlier UTs such that the stronger the event, the earlier the maximum. Occurrence of category >1 values are unlikely between 10 and 14 UT. For categories ≥4, there are actually two peaks in the premidnight UT sector, one at 17 UT (∼19 MLT) and one at ∼21 UT (∼23 MLT), with a relative minimum in between at 19 UT. Viljanen et al. [ ] show the diurnal distribution of intense (top 0.1% of 1min values in 1996–2008) GIC as ranked by the sum of modeled absolute GIC of all nodes in the European high‐voltage power grid. The modeled GIC results cover a shorter period (1996–2008) than |Δ J eq |/Δ t (1994–2013), but the years 2009–2013 were very quiet (e.g., Figure f), so their contribution to extreme cases is small. Some discrepancy between the results may be caused especially due to the highly active year 1994. Nonetheless, the diurnal distribution of intense GIC peaks around 02 UT and 20 UT [ Viljanen et al. , ], in agreement with that of category ≥3 |Δ J eq |/Δ t . The AACGM latitude distribution of |Δ J eq |/Δ t in each category as well as of the IMAGE magnetometers (gray bars) are illustrated in Figure d. The most intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t are concentrated poleward of about 63° latitude. Poleward of 71° latitude, the different categories do not show obvious latitude differences, but in the region of the densest magnetometer network between 63° and 68° latitude, the peak of the distribution is located more equatorward the more active the category is. The minimum in the |Δ J eq |/Δ t distributions between 68° and 71° latitude is related to the gap in the IMAGE magnetometer station network between Bear Island (BJN) at 71.45° latitude and the northernmost mainland station Nordkapp (NOR) at 67.73° latitude. Pulkkinen et al. [ ] have shown that when the scale lengths of the ionospheric features are larger than the spacings between the stations, the SECS method applied to IMAGE magnetometer data is able to give equivalent currents well in the gap between the continent and Svalbard. However, Figure d clearly shows that intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t in this region cannot be captured. The weaker minimum in all categories around 72° is located between BJN and Hopen Island (HOP) at 73.06° and is also likely related to the relatively large distance between the magnetometers. Figure e shows the seasonal distribution of |Δ J eq |/Δ t in each category. The equinoxes are indicated by the solid gray vertical lines and the solstices by the dashed lines (the ticks on the x axis correspond to the middle of the month). The distribution of the weakest category‐1 values displays only weak seasonal variation, with slightly more occurrences around spring and fall equinoxes than around winter and summer solstices. For the stronger events the summer minimum is deeper. None of the most extreme category‐6 events occurred in May, June, or July. Even the Bastille Day storm in July 2000 [ Lepping et al. , ] did not produce category‐6 disturbances. For the intense category ≥4 events, the mild spring equinox peak occurred earlier in the year than for the weaker events, in February instead of March. The October maximum was related to the occurrence of five intense storms (Table ): 04 October 1995, 01 October 1997, 04 October 2002, 21 October 2003, and the Halloween storm on 29–30 October 2003. The seasonal distribution of intense GIC in the European power grid has its maximum in October and minimum in June [ Viljanen et al. , ], in agreement with category ≥3 |Δ J eq |/Δ t . Figure f shows the long‐term monthly distribution of |Δ J eq |/Δ t in each category from January 1994 to December 2013. The solar minima are indicated by the solid gray vertical lines and the solar maximum by the dashed line. The majority of the most extreme |Δ J eq |/Δ t , including those during the Halloween storm that correspond to the highest peak in Figure f, occurred during the declining phase of cycle 23. Extreme events also occurred during the declining phase of cycle 22 and during the rising phase of cycle 23. After 15 December 2006, there have been no category‐6 events. The lull during the previous minimum was much shorter, extending only from October 1995 to October 1997. These observations agree roughly with those reported by Nevanlinna [ ] and Echer et al. [ ], according to whom intense magnetic storms often appear about 1 year before or 1–3 years after the sunspot maximum. The long‐term distribution of intense GIC in the European power grid [ Viljanen et al. , ] is in agreement with the category‐6 |Δ J eq |/Δ t distribution. Especially, the peak in October–November 2003 is prominent in both cases. The AACGM latitude and MLT of the values in each category are illustrated in Figure a. In line with Figure c, the most extreme events are concentrated in two regions: the dusk or premidnight sector and the dawn sector. In the dawn sector, category‐5 events are concentrated between about 65° and 70° latitude and 03 and 07 MLT, a region typically dominated by the westward electrojet [e.g., Guo et al. , ; Juusola et al. , , ]. The most extreme category‐6 events are found at the equatorward boundary of this region. These events are probably related to undulations of the westward electrojet [ Opgenoorth et al. , ; Untiedt and Baumjohann , ]. According to the statistics of Newell et al. [ ], this region corresponds to increased diffuse aurora energy flux during high solar wind driving conditions. The category‐6 occurrences are somewhat more scattered on the duskside than on the dawnside, with the strongest concentration found poleward of about 70° latitude between 17 and 20 MLT. This corresponds to the category‐6 peak around 17 UT in Figure c. Most likely these values are related to the westward traveling surge (WTS), i.e., the western end of the substorm bulge [ Nakamura et al. , ]. According to Newell et al. [ ], this region corresponds to increased monoenergetic aurora energy flux during high solar wind driving conditions. Several category‐6 events can also be found around midnight, corresponding to the category‐6 peak around 21 UT in Figure c. Relation of the Time Derivative of the Equivalent Current Density and GIC The variation magnetic field ( B ) on the ground is linearly dependent on the (equivalent) ionospheric currents ( J eq ). Thus, d B /d t depends only on the concurrent value of d J eq /d t . GIC is closely related to d B /d t [ Viljanen et al. , ]. However, this relation is not strictly instantaneous, since the time history of d B /d t (or d J eq /d t ) has also a diffusive contribution due to electromagnetic induction in the conducting ground. In other words, GIC at a given time depends on all previous values of d B /d t . Therefore, GIC basically acts as a low‐pass filtered value of d B /d t [ Pulkkinen et al. , ]. If d B /d t or d J eq /d t has only a single short‐time peak, it does not necessarily cause an intense GIC. The European‐wide coverage of the major GIC events is clear when comparing the most intense events in Table : when there are top 40 GIC in Northern Europe (NE, first column), there generally are also top 40 GIC in Central and Southern Europe (CE, second column). This is true particularly for K p = 9. Nonetheless, there are also differences, as close to 50% of the NE days are not common to CE days. Although the |Δ J eq |/Δ t category is at least three for all days listed in Table , only nine of the 22 category‐6 days between 1996 and 2008 in Table coincide with the top 40 Northern Europe GIC days. The eighth and ninth columns in Table list the rank of the corresponding NE and CE GIC days in Table . Here, a dash indicates that the value is not in the top 40; N A indicates that the value occurred outside the period 1996–2008. This view reveals that if the number of category‐6 |Δ J eq |/Δ t values occurring during the day was only 1, there was no corresponding top 40 GIC. Out of the 26 category‐6 days, only 3days had more than one category‐6 value (third column in Table ) but no related top 40 NE GIC: event number 6 on 17 April 1999, event number 7 on 17 March 2003, and event number 16 on 02 January 2005. These three days were also the only ones between 1996 and 2008 with more than one category‐6 values that were not associated with an intense magnetic storm ( D s t ≤−100 nT) as identified by Echer et al. [ ]. Whenever the category‐6 day was associated with top 40 NE GIC, the top K p value for the day (last column in Table ) exceeded 8 and, apart from event number 15 on 11 April 2001, whenever the category‐6 event was not associated with top 40 NE GIC, the top K p was smaller than 8. Figure b shows the AACGM latitude and MLT of the |Δ J eq |/Δ t in each category for the nine days classified as category 6 in Table (i.e., they were in the top 40 GIC days). The remaining 31 days in Table are shown in Figure c. Finally, there are 13 days (between 1996 and 2008) classified as category 6 but which were not in the top 40 GIC days. These are shown in Figure d. The most obvious difference between the days that were and were not on the top 40 GIC list is the latitudinal extent of activity: while in Figure d there are only a few values equatorward of about 60° latitude, in Figures b and c a significant portion of the values lies equatorward of 60°. Thus, although typically category‐6 disturbances occur when |Δ J eq |/Δ t activity has extended to latitudes <60°(intense magnetic storms), such disturbances can also occur when the activity is confined to latitudes >60°. In such cases, the activity tends to be short‐lived (e.g., only one occurrence of category‐6 |Δ J eq |/Δ t during the day). The occurrence of intense GIC requires equatorward extension of the activity, to the region where the majority of the high‐voltage power grid nodes are located, and possibly more than a single peak of intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t . Longer Perspective To assess the long‐term validity of the |Δ J eq |/Δ t statistics based on the years 1994–2013, we consider measurements of the magnetic field at the Nurmijärvi (NUR) observatory in 1975–2013. Following Viljanen et al. [ ], we use the time derivative of the horizontal magnetic field vector _placeholder_formula_ , where X , Y are the geographic north and east components, respectively. The derivative is calculated using the difference of successive time steps. This definition differs from the one used for |Δ J eq |/Δ t but is not expected to cause any significant bias. Because NUR is located in the southern part of IMAGE (56.89° AACGM latitude), it cannot represent the whole region. However, the data reveal that the period of 1994–2013 gives only limited information concerning extreme events. The following major storms before 1994 have a notable effect on statistics: 13–14 July 1982, 8 February 1986, 13–14 March 1989, and 24–25 March 1991. These events also affected power grids [ Boteler et al. , ; Kappenman et al. , ; Bolduc , ]. The seasonal distribution of the top events at NUR in 1994–2013 (Figures a and b) shows a large peak in October and quiet time from May to July, similarly to |Δ J eq |/Δ t in Figure e. The longer period of 1975–2013 (Figures c and d) makes March and July comparable to October for NUR. Especially, the July 1982 event eliminates the apparent quietness of summer months. It also makes 1982 the most active year in 1975–2013, exceeding 2003 (Figures e and f). Based on geoelectric fields modeled from IMAGE magnetometer data, Myllys et al. [ ] estimated that a once per 100 year event could be twice as large as the largest event in 1994–2011. Their results show that the July 1982 storm is actually of that magnitude. As a sidenote, we remark that the February 1986 storm occurred at the sunspot minimum [ Garcia and Dryer , ], so it was relatively exceptional in this sense. The diurnal behavior of d H /d t at NUR (not shown) does not indicate new features. Peak values of d H /d t tend to occur at nighttime as for |Δ J eq |/Δ t , and hours around the local noon are quiet. The same is true for the measured GIC in Finland [ Viljanen et al. , ]. Concluding, it seems that typical diurnal, seasonal, and solar cycle features of intense but not the most extreme geomagnetic activity can be derived even from a time series of 13 years (GIC) of data. However, a time series of 20 years (IMAGE) or even 39 years (Nurmijärvi) is not sufficiently long to definitely reveal the most extreme behavior of the geomagnetic field. Conclusions In this study, we have analyzed the extreme behavior of the time derivative of the ionospheric equivalent current vector (|Δ J eq |/Δ t ) in the AACGM latitude range 54°–76°, derived from ground magnetic field data from the North European IMAGE magnetometer network for the 20 year period 1994–2013. The occurrence of extreme |Δ J eq |/Δ t values was compared with the occurrence of intense modeled GIC in the North European (52°–68° latitude) and South and Central European (<52°latitude) high‐voltage power grids for the 13 year period 1996–2008 [ Viljanen et al. , ]. A longer perspective was obtained by comparing the characteristic behavior of |Δ J eq |/Δ t with that of the time derivative of the horizontal magnetic field vector d H /d t from one of the southernmost IMAGE stations, Nurmijärvi (NUR, ∼57°latitude), for the 39 year period 1975–2013. Our main conclusions are the following: The diurnal distribution of intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t showed two peaks: one in the premidnight sector and one in the dawn sector. The highest values were very rare in the postnoon sector. The diurnal distributions of intense GIC and NUR d H /d t were in agreement. The seasonal distribution of intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t peaked in October due to the occurrence of several storms. The most intense values did not occur around midsummer. The seasonal distribution of intense GIC was in agreement. NUR d H /d t did not agree with the quietness of summer months, indicating that it was related to a coincidental lack of intense storms during the shorter period. The long‐term monthly distribution of intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t showed the largest peaks during the declining phase of the solar cycle, especially in October–November 2003. The most intense values did not occur around solar minima. The long‐term monthly distribution of intense GIC was in agreement. NUR d H /d t agreed with the increased activity in the declining phase but demonstrated that extreme events can occur during any phase of the solar cycle, even the minimum. Typically, when intense |Δ J eq |/Δ t occurred, geomagnetic activity extended to latitudes <60°, K p ≥8, and modeling suggested large GIC in the European high‐voltage power grids. Intense, although short‐lived, |Δ J eq |/Δ t also occurred when geomagnetic activity was confined to latitudes >60°. In such cases, typically 5≤ K p < 8, and modeling suggested that there were no large GIC in the European high‐voltage power grids. Acknowledgments The IMAGE magnetometer data (1994–2013) and Nurmijärvi observatory (NUR) data (1975–2013) used in this paper are available at (NUR data before 1992 are available at request). The D s t index and K p index data used in this paper are available at the World Data Center for Geomagnetism, Kyoto, . We acknowledge the financial support by the Academy of Finland to the ReSoLVE Center of Excellence (project no. 272157). The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreements 263325 (ECLAT) and 260330 (EURISGIC). We thank the institutes who maintain the IMAGE Magnetometer Array.