Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509
www.elsevier.com/locate/asr

Low-frequency electric ﬁeld and density ﬂuctuation measurements
on (Solar Orbiter) SolarOrbiter
A. Vaivads
b

a,*

, A.I. Eriksson a, M. André a, L.G. Blomberg b, J.-E. Wahlund a, S.D. Bale

c

a
Swedish Institute of Space Physics, Box 537, SE-75121, Uppsala, Sweden
Space and Plasma Physics, School of Electrical Engineering, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Teknikringen 31, SE-100 44, Stockholm, Sweden
c
Department of Physics and Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Received 13 October 2006; received in revised form 19 October 2006; accepted 19 October 2006

Abstract
Solar Orbiter will orbit the Sun down to a distance of 0.22 AU allowing detailed in situ studies of important but unexplored regions of
the solar wind in combination with coordinated remote sensing of the Sun. In-situ measurements require high quality measurements of
particle distributions and electric and magnetic ﬁelds. We show that such important scientiﬁc topics as the identiﬁcation of coronal heating remnants, solar wind turbulence, magnetic reconnection and shock formation within coronal mass ejections all require electric ﬁeld
and plasma density measurements in the frequency range from DC up to about 100 Hz. We discuss how such measurements can be
achieved using the double-probe technique. We sketch a few possible antenna design solutions.
 2006 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Electric ﬁeld; Solar Orbiter; Solar wind; Plasma density

1. Introduction
Solar Orbiter is an ESA mission planned for launch
after 2015 that is going to produce images of the Sun at
an unprecedented resolution and simultaneously perform
the closest ever in situ measurements. This combination
will allow us to address many important science questions
as outlined in the Solar Orbiter science requirement document. Marsch et al. (2005) presents a short summary of the
main goals and the mission proﬁle of the Solar Orbiter. The
Solar Orbiter will have a 150-day orbit with the perihelion
at 0.22 AU  47 Rx  33 · 106 m. At perihelion the orbital diﬀerential motion relative to the Sun becomes as low as
2.5/day allowing investigations of the temporal evolution
of solar phenomena both remotely and in situ. The orbit
is in 3:2 resonance with Venus and the inclination of the
orbit is increased at each Venus passage, and at the end
of the nominal mission the inclination will exceed 30.
*

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: andris@irfu.se (A. Vaivads).

Thus, the Solar Orbiter will cover a wide range of latitudes
allowing studies of diﬀerent solar phenomena.
The Solar Orbiter is planned to have two suites of
instruments, one for remote observations of the Sun and
another for in situ observations. Details are described in
the Solar Orbiter payload deﬁnition document. The
in situ instruments can be divided into two main packages:
the Field Package and the Particle Package. When selecting
speciﬁc instruments for the mission diﬀerent compromises
must be made regarding the design, the measurement
range, the resolution, the quality, etc. All these compromises and trade-oﬀs are weighted one against the other, based
on the scientiﬁc objectives, constraints of power, mass,
design, etc. In the case of the Fields Package, the major
compromises are related to the number, type, design and
location of antennas. Here we argue that many important
science questions require that the Fields Package can measure low-frequency electric ﬁeld and density ﬂuctuations.
By low-frequency here we mean DC up to 100 Hz, thus
covering MHD scales and frequencies up to characteristic
ion and ion/electron scales. Measurements of electric ﬁeld

0273-1177/$30  2006 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2006.10.011

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509

and density ﬂuctuations at these frequencies is a very challenging task and so far heliosphere missions have not been
able to supply reliable data in this frequency range, see discussion in the Introduction section of Kellogg et al. (2006).
We believe that Solar Orbiter can be the ﬁrst such mission
that provides good quality electric ﬁeld and density ﬂuctuation measurements in this frequency range. This puts
some signiﬁcant constraints on the possible antenna design.
In the Science section we present a few examples of important science questions that require low-frequency electric
ﬁeld and density ﬂuctuation measurements. In the Context
section we discuss the available low-frequency electric ﬁeld
and density measurements from other spacecraft missions
in past as well as upcoming missions. Particularly we stress
the advantages of carrying out such measurements by the
Solar Orbiter. In the Instrumentation section we suggest a
few possible technical solutions and discuss their advantages
and disadvantages. The results are summarized in Section 5.
2. Science
One of the top-level scientiﬁc goals of the Solar Orbiter
mission is to ‘‘Determine the properties, dynamics and
interactions of plasma, ﬁelds and particles in the nearSun heliosphere’’ (Solar Orbiter science requirements
document). Under this goal there are many more speciﬁc
questions, some examples of which we will address below.
However, we note directly the importance of obtaining
electric ﬁeld (E) and density ﬂuctuation (dn) measurements.
 Simultaneous measurements of magnetic ﬁeld (B), E and
dn allow us to distinguish among the slow, fast, and
intermediate MHD wave modes which are of fundamental importance.
 Much of the local wave-particle interaction is due to
electrostatic waves that can be often observed only in
E and dn data.
 Many fundamental quantities such as Poynting ﬂux and
wave energy require knowledge of B, E, and/or dn.
 Of particular interest are E and dn measurements at
MHD scales and scales covering characteristic ion scales
where MHD starts to break down as these are the scales
where ions can be energized.

2.1. Plasma parameters at the Solar Orbiter perihelion
Before discussing some of the scientiﬁc topics in more
details we characterize the plasma at perihelion of the Solar
Orbiter where most of the science operations will be carried
out. Typical plasma parameters that can be expected at
0.22 AU distance are given in Table 1. The wide range of
parameters gives a correspondingly wide range of characteristic scales that are involved in physical processes. Some
typical values of these scales are given in Table 2. As a
rough rule of thumb we can see that characteristic frequencies involving ions – proton gyrofrequency fcp, lower

1503

Table 1
Typical plasma parameters that can be expected at 0.22 AU distance
Quantity

Fast solar wind

Slow solar
wind

CME

Total
variation

B [nT]
n [cm 3]
v [km/s]

40–80
60–100
600

40–80
200–400
350

5–500
20–1000
300–1000

Tp [eV]
Te [eV]

20–80
8–30

2–20
1–8

40–130
50–500
300–
1000
3–50
1–30

2–100
1–50

The parameters are B, magnetic ﬁeld; n, plasma density; v, plasma velocity;
Tp, proton temperature and Te, electrons temperature. Table is partially
based on Burlaga (2001); Wang et al., 2005.

Table 2
Typical plasma scales at 0.22 AU distance for plasma parameters B = 50
nT, n = 100 cm 3, T = 20 eV, v = 500 km/s
Frequencies

[Hz]

Lengths scales

[km]

Velocities

[km/s]

fpe
fce
flh
fcp
VSW/qp

90,000
1400
30
0.75
40

kD
qp
c/xpi
qe

0.007
13
23
0.3

Vte
VSW
VA
Vtp

3000
500
100
60

The parameters are fpe, plasma frequency; fce, electron gyrofrequency; flh,
lower hybrid frequency; fcp, proton gyrofrequency; kD, Debye length; qp,
proton gyroradius; c/xpi, ion inertial length; qe, electron gyroradius; Vte,
electron thermal velocity; VSW, solar wind velocity; VA, Alfvén velocity;
Vtp, proton thermal velocity.

hybrid frequency flh and ion gyroradius scales doppler
shifted by solar wind velocity – are all in the interval from
zero to about 100 Hz. Frequencies depending only on electrons – electron gyrofrequency fce and plasma frequency fp
– are typically at 1 kHz and above.
2.2. Solar wind turbulence
The understanding of physical processes that lead to
solar wind turbulence and its role in coronal heating and
solar wind acceleration are major topics in coronal studies
(Leamon et al., 2000 Bruno et al., 2006). As an example,
Cranmer (2004) states that ‘‘Much what has been done
until now is to work backwards, from the measured plasma
parameters deduce the properties of the kinetic-scale ﬂuctuations that would provide the energy’’ [for extended coronal heating]. They suggest that it is important to look at
large scale energy input to the turbulence as a constraint
on possible dissipation at smaller scales. At the same time
there is a large gap in our knowledge of the kinetic ﬂuctuations, particularly at dissipation scales where the energy
from the turbulence leads to the dissipation in form of
coronal heating. Characteristic dissipation scales are comparable to ion scales, can be both spatial and temporal,
and from Table 2 we see that they correspond to frequencies from DC up to about 100 Hz. In situ measurements of
these kinetic ﬂuctuation scales are crucial for the understanding of turbulence dissipation mechanisms.

1504

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509

Fig. 1. Density ﬂuctuation spectra as estimated from radio sounding of
solar corona during the Galileo spacecraft solar conjunction Eﬁmov et al.,
2005. The spectra show two spectral breakpoints where spectra ﬂattens at
low and high frequencies. If we look at the high frequency spectral
breakpoint as measured at two diﬀerent distances, 6.3 and 9.0 Rx, one can
see that the spectral breakpoint moves to higher frequencies with
increasing distance from the Sun, from 0.2 to 0.3 Hz, respectively, when
comparing 6.3 and 9.0 Rx distances. The authors conclude that the high
frequency spectral breakpoint at which the density spectra ﬂatten out
moves to higher frequencies with increasing distance from the Sun. To
measure both the low and high frequency breakpoints at 0.22 AU
distance, density ﬂuctuations should be measured in the frequency range
0.001–10 Hz. Figure adopted from Fig. 2 in Eﬁmov et al. (2005).

2.2.1. Density ﬂuctuations
Density ﬂuctuations in the solar wind have been studied
both in situ and remotely. Density ﬂuctuations at very low
frequencies have been measured in situ by the Helios spacecraft (Marsch and Tu, 1990). Using the ion instrument and
studying the frequency range 6 · 10 6 6 · 10 3 Hz, it is
shown that turbulence intensity and development are different in slow and fast solar winds. Similar conclusions
have been reached looking at even higher frequency density
ﬂuctuations (f < 0.6 Hz) as estimated using remote coronal
sounding experiments (Eﬁmov et al., 2005). In addition,
those observations show spectral breakpoints where density ﬂuctuation spectra ﬂatten out at both low and high frequencies (in the frequency range 0.01–1 Hz). There is a
clear dependence of the frequency of spectral breakpoints
on the distance from the Sun. This dependence is illustrated
in Fig. 1. The spectral breakpoints are of particular interest
in the turbulence studies as they indicate a change in the
turbulence regime and their in situ observations would be
crucial to understanding the ways density ﬂuctuations are
injected and dissipated in the solar wind. Fig. 1 suggests
that to cover both spectral breakpoints at the Solar Orbiter
distance density ﬂuctuations should be measured at least in
the frequency range 0.001–10 Hz.
2.2.2. Electric and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations
Solar wind turbulence has mainly been studied in situ by
analyzing magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations. A major question is
how this turbulence leads to heating of the corona. Two
major mechanisms that have been proposed are ion cyclo-

tron heating and spectral cascade. In both cases wave electric ﬁelds seen in the frame of moving ions should have
signiﬁcant amplitude at the ion gyrofrequency. In the ﬁrst
case waves at the ion gyrofrequency energize the ions while
in the second case spectral cascade leads to the generation
of waves with ever smaller wavelengths while at some limit
eﬃcient damping sets in. A breakpoint in the magnetic ﬁeld
spectra has been used as an indicator when turbulence goes
into the dissipative regime. Detailed analysis of 33 turbulent spectra observed by the Wind spacecraft have shown
that the breakpoint is located somewhere between 0.05–
0.2 Hz which corresponds to 2–3 fcp or 0.5–0.7 VSW(c/
xpi) 1 (Leamon et al., 2000). The main conclusion from
this is that understanding of the turbulence dissipation is
not possible without having observations covering frequencies around the ion gyrofrequency and covering spatial
lengths comparable to the ion inertial lengths scales.
An important question is what kind of measurements
would allow us to distinguish which of several turbulence
models best describes the solar wind. A recent study by Bale
et al. (2005) shows that electric ﬁeld data are crucial for this
task. Using Cluster spacecraft data, Bale et al. (2005)
obtained the ﬁrst detailed observations of a breakpoint in
spectra from solar wind turbulence using both electric ﬁeld
and magnetic ﬁeld data. Fig. 2 shows the resulting spectra.
By combined usage of E and B spectra, Bale et al. (2005)
could distinguish that at the breakpoint spacecraft were
observing wave modes of kinetic Alfvén type, thus supporting the idea of spectral cascade. This was a single measurement that requires further conﬁrmation by spacecraft at
1 AU distance. A major question is if similar mechanisms
are operating close to the Sun where the turbulence can still
signiﬁcantly contribute to the extended heating of corona.
2.3. Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejections (CME)
Interplanetary shocks driven by CMEs are a source of
Type II solar bursts. Understanding CMEs and Type II solar
bursts is important for being able to predict CMEs that are a
major cause of geomagnetic storms. Theoretically predicted
behaviour of emissions depends on shock parameters
(Knock et al., 2003). The exact generation mechanisms of
the electromagnetic radiation are not clear. Mechanisms
such as Langmuir wave interaction with ion acoustic waves
or Langmuir wave conversion at density gradients have been
suggested. In addition, the bursts can have complicated
internal structure suggesting that most probably diﬀerent
generation mechanisms can be at play in parallel. Shocks
involve fast changes in density, and localized electric ﬁelds
on ion scales. Also ion acoustic waves are on ion scales. Thus,
high time resolution E, B and density ﬂuctuation measurements are needed to study these phenomena.
2.4. Reconnection
Magnetic reconnection is one of the fundamental
processes that needs to be better understood to make

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509

1505

Fig. 2. The ﬁgure shows turbulence spectra of B and E ﬂuctuations measured by Cluster s/c in the solar wind. Spectral breakpoint can be seen at
wavelength kqi 6 1, at shorter wavelengths spectra becomes more electrostatic. Adopted from Fig. 3 in Bale et al. (2005).

signiﬁcant progress in explaining energy conversion, transport and other processes in the solar atmosphere. It is
involved on all scales, starting from CMEs where it is
believed to be crucial for allowing CMEs to escape the
Sun and ending with the smallest scales where microreconnection can be one of the ways energy is dissipated in solar
wind turbulence.
Recently several studies have been presented analyzing
local magnetic reconnection events in the solar wind from
0.31 AU out to 5.4 AU distance (Gosling et al., 2005; Gosling et al., 2006b; Gosling et al., 2006a). Most of these
events were associated with narrow current sheets forming
behind CMEs, see Fig. 3. Similar remote observations of
reconnection have been made using SOHO spacecraft
observations at distances close to the Sun (Lin et al.,
2005). The SOHO observations show that narrow extended
current sheets form behind the CMEs and reconnection is
ongoing within those current sheets starting a few solar
radii from the Sun. The Solar Orbiter would be optimally
located to observe the temporal evolution of the reconnection processes within these current sheets. The reconnection process can be identiﬁed using only particle
instruments, however, E ﬁeld measurements are needed
for understanding the reconnection process as is well
known from the studies in the terrestrial magnetosphere
(Vaivads et al., 2006). For example, to understand how

diﬀerent particle species are energized during the reconnection process, one needs to have information on ﬁelds on
characteristic scales of those particles, particularly E
because particles are energized by the E ﬁeld. Also when
slow shocks or other discontinuities are involved one needs
to have E measurements to be able to estimate potential
jumps across the discontinuities.

3. The Solar Orbiter in the context of other missions
Several satellites have performed plasma measurements
in the solar wind. However, few missions with comprehensive plasma instrumentation have been dedicated for solar
and/or solar wind science and have had instruments to
measure electric ﬁeld and/or density ﬂuctuations in the frequency range from DC to about 100 Hz. Notable exceptions include Ulysses and Wind.
Ulysses was launched in 1990 on a trajectory toward
Jupiter, whose gravity was used to put the spacecraft in a
polar orbit around the Sun. To date the Sun has been circled twice. Ulysses included a 72-m tip-to-tip dipole antenna and a 7.5 m spin-axis monopole for electric ﬁeld
measurements. In addition the spacecraft carried a ﬂuxgate magnetometer. Both the electric ﬁeld and the magnetic
ﬁeld signals were fed into a Wave Form Analyzer that

1506

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509

a

b

c

Fig. 3. In situ reconnection jet observations in the solar wind. (a) a sketch
of narrow current sheet formation behind CMEs, adopted from Fig. 1 in
Lin et al. (2005). (b and c) In situ observations by ACE, (b) shows the
reconnecting component of magnetic ﬁeld and (c) shows the presence of a
reconnection jet in both protons and alphas, adopted from Fig. 3 in
Gosling et al. (2005).

performed spectral analysis in the range 0.08–448 Hz, in
addition to measurements at higher frequencies.
Wind was launched in 1994 and has spent most of its
time since launch in the near-Earth solar wind. Wind measures the electric ﬁeld using two pairs of wire dipole antennas in the spin plane and one pair of rigid antennas along
the spin axis. A low-frequency FFT receiver covers the frequency range DC – 10 kHz. There are also higher frequency receivers.
In addition to spacecraft dedicated to solar wind studies,
there have been many spacecraft that have had the terrestrial magnetosphere as the primary objective, but the
instrumentation of which have allowed detailed studies of
electric ﬁeld and density ﬂuctuations in the solar wind.
Examples are Cluster, Geotail, Polar, etc. Particularly the
multi-spacecraft capabilities of Cluster have proven very
valuable as shown by the turbulence example in the previous section.
Measurements of electric ﬁeld and density ﬂuctuations
in solar wind at distances less than 1 AU are lacking. While
Helios spacecraft had a possibility to measure electric ﬁeld
spectra at low frequencies, the data under 500 Hz were
unusable due to the interference from the spacecraft solar
array (Schwenn and Marsch, 1991). In principle, spacecraft
bound for Venus should be usable for exploring the solar

wind in the inner heliosphere. However, from a plasma
point of view these spacecraft are usually not very well
instrumented.
Among future solar missions, Stereo (launch 2006) and
Solar Wind Sentinels (AO 2006) are the ones planned to
carry the most comprehensive plasma instrumentation. Stereo is focused on solar radio bursts. It does have the capability to measure waves also at lower frequencies, but the
extent to which this will be pursued is unclear. Solar Wind
Sentinels is a comprehensive multi-spacecraft mission to ﬂy
inside of Earth’s orbit, focusing on providing some capability of space weather predictions.
BepiColombo will have a comprehensive plasma payload including low-frequency wave measurements. The
spacecraft will only spend part of its orbit around Mercury
in the solar wind and thus will not oﬀer the opportunity of
continuous monitoring of solar wave emissions in the lowfrequency domain. However, assuming the two missions
coincide in time, BepiColombo may be a nice complement
to Solar Orbiter, oﬀ and on providing a vantage point at a
diﬀerent heliospheric longitude.
Past and planned missions taken into account, Solar
Orbiter will provide a unique opportunity for continuous
in situ measurements of low-frequency wave activity in
the solar wind, at solar distances where the observed waves
may be remnants of the coronal heating processes. Furthermore, Solar Orbiter will at times co-rotate with the solar
surface. Finally, in addition to the plasma measurements,
Solar Orbiter will perform optical measurements in a wide
range of wavelengths, thus providing context for the interpretation of the wave measurements regardless of the
spacecraft’s location relative to Earth and terrestrial solar
observatories.
4. Instrumentation
As demonstrated in the previous Sections, information
on electric ﬁeld and plasma density ﬂuctuations at high
time resolution is needed for proper understanding of
important dynamical processes in the corona and solar
wind. To obtain such measurements, we here propose a
double-probe instrument, with electronics for the measurement of electric ﬁelds from DC up to 1 kHz and sharing
antennas with an instrument measuring waves at higher
frequencies. As a by-product, such an instrument also gives
information on plasma density ﬂuctuations at high time
resolution, by use of the spacecraft potential. Additional
plasma diagnostics could also be obtained from use in
Langmuir probe mode.
Double-probe instruments are widely used for measurement of electric ﬁelds in the terrestrial environment. In
denser ionospheric plasmas, the probe potential is often
ﬂoating (Maynard, 1998), while instruments operating in
the tenuous plasmas in the magnetosphere and solar wind
typically use a technique based on sending a ﬁxed bias current to the probes (Pedersen et al., 1998). To minimize perturbations from the spacecraft carrying the instrument, one

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509

usually measures the voltage between two identical probes
mounted at the tips of long booms protruding from the
spacecraft. In the ideal case, the boom length should exceed
the Debye length, to ensure small inﬂuence of any electrical
perturbations from the spacecraft. In practice, useful measurements can be obtained also in more tenuous plasmas,
for reasonably symmetric spacecraft and a carefully
designed electrical neighbourhood of the probes. The latter
neighbourhood usually consists of elements bootstrapped
to the probe potential plus or minus some oﬀset value,
ensuring that the potential at the probe is not just determined by the boom potential.
To optimize the use of scarce spacecraft resources, it is
likely desirable to use the same booms for LF and HF measurements. This can be achieved in several ways. One way
is to use the LF probes also as monopole antenna elements
for the HF instrument, as is very successfully done on for
example the Cluster satellites (Gustafsson et al., 1997; Gurnett et al., 1997). However, the frequency range that can be
achieved in this way without having preampliﬁers located
on the boom, close to the probes, is likely insuﬃcient for
an HF instrument. Another way is to use the outer shield
of the booms themselves as antennas for the HF instru-

1507

ment, while the probes are mounted on the tip of the
booms (or actually constituted by the boom tips, see
below).
For solar wind measurements, booms much in excess of
the Debye length (5–10 m, see Table 2) can be achieved
only as wire booms on spinning spacecraft. However, solid
booms with lengths of order 5 m are certainly feasible, and
given a reasonably symmetric spacecraft with a conductive
surface and a careful design of probe and adjacent biased
parts, good electric ﬁeld measurements can be obtained
with such booms. In order to investigate polarization properties of waves and obtain a reasonably complete picture of
the electric ﬁeld, measurements in two dimensions are
needed. This means a minimum of three booms, which
could be arranged as suggested in Fig. 4a. From the diﬀerences between two pairs of probes, for example 1–2 and
1–3, a 2-D E-ﬁeld can be constructed. However, a more
symmetric arrangement would be obtained using four
booms as illustrated in Fig. 4b. This also brings all probes
away from any wake and Mach cone structures forming
around the spacecraft. The higher degree of symmetry
and longer baseline as compared to Fig. 4a should also
oﬀer advantages for an HF instrument, though at the cost

Fig. 4. Some possible Solar Orbiter boom conﬁgurations. In each case, the outermost parts of the booms are used as electric ﬁeld probes.

1508

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509

of the loss of the possibility of obtaining three-dimensional
measurements using each boom as a monopole antenna
oﬀered by the arrangement in Fig. 4a. The 3D capability
is restored using the conﬁguration Fig. 4c, with one boom
pair angled towards the Sun at around 45. Other possibilities may also be considered, and the ﬁnal choice of boom
conﬁguration will need to take into consideration how to
minimize inﬂuence of wake eﬀects, asymmetries and spacecraft photoelectrons on the LF measurements under the
constraints posed by the needs of the HF instrumentation
and the spacecraft resource budget.
On a non-spinning spacecraft with a well deﬁned symmetry direction for photoemission caused by UV radiation
as well as for plasma ﬂow, as both come from the Sun,
cylindrical probes could be used. This amounts to using
the outermost part of the boom as a probe. Depending
on boom thickness, a probe length of 10–20 cm could be
considered, with some adjacent biased (bootstrapped) elements. Probe arrangements of this kind, including the
cylindrical geometry, will be used on the EFI instrument
on the upcoming THEMIS mission, and are planned also
for the MMS FIELDS instrument. The EFI instrument
on the POLAR satellite (Harvey et al., 1995) has stiﬀ axial
booms of similar size, but uses spherical probes, which
would be an unnecessary mechanical complication in our
case. Nevertheless, the axial booms of POLAR EFI are a
close analogue of one pair of booms in Fig. 4b.
5. Conclusions
Solar Orbiter is an ESA mission planned to take high
resolution images of the Sun and perform the closest ever
in situ observations of solar wind. Several major scientiﬁc
questions can be addressed by observing electric ﬁeld and
density ﬂuctuations from low frequencies up to around
100 Hz. This frequency range includes waves essential for
wave-particle interaction involving ions (the ion gyrofrequency and the lower hybrid frequency) and also ion scales
(the ion gyroradius) Doppler shifted by the solar wind
motion as seen in the spacecraft frame.
One important question is what models best describe
the ﬂuctuations on ion temporal and spatial scales in
the solar wind, and how these ﬂuctuations are dissipated
to heat ions and electrons. Clearly observations of density
and electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuations are needed, together with
measurements of the magnetic ﬁeld at the same frequencies, to obtain scientiﬁc closure. Another example is the
generation of electromagnetic waves such as Type II solar
bursts from interplanetary shocks. These waves are interesting since they can be used for remote sensing once their
generation is understood. This generation most likely
involves rapid density variations and localized electric
ﬁeld which can be detected in situ by Solar Orbiter. Magnetic reconnection is a phenomenon believed to be important for the escape of CMEs, and at much smaller scales
may be important for local energy dissipation. As is
known from studies in the terrestrial magnetosphere,

observations of small scale density and electric ﬁeld structures are essential for understanding reconnection in a
new parameter regime.
As any exploratory spacecraft, Solar Orbiter will have
limited resources for the payload. To optimize the use of
resources, one must seriously consider using the same
antennas over the whole frequency range of interest. We
ﬁnd that by using reasonable compromises it is possible
to use the same payload to detect small scale and low-frequency density and electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, and to
observe electric ﬁelds at frequencies of several MHz.
Acknowledgements
A.V. research was supported by the Swedish Research
Council. Work at the Royal Institute of Technology was
partially supported by the Swedish National Space Board
and the Alfvén Laboratory Centre for Space and Fusion
Plasma Physics.
References
Bale, S.D., Kellogg, P.J., Mozer, F.S., Horbury, T.S., Reme, H.
Measurement of the electric ﬂuctuation spectrum of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (21), 215002, 2005.
Bruno, R., Bavassano, B., D’Amicis, R., Carbone, V., Sorriso-Valvo, L.,
Pietropaolo, E. On the radial evolution of Alfvénic turbulence in the
solar wind. Space Sci. Rev. 122, 321–328, 2006.
Burlaga, L.F. Magnetic ﬁelds and plasmas in the inner heliosphere: helios
results. Planet. Space Sci. 49, 1619–1627, 2001.
Cranmer, S.R. Coronal Heating Versus Solar Wind Acceleration. In:
Proceedings of the SOHO 15 Workshop – Coronal Heating. 6–9
September 2004, St. Andrews, Scotland, UK (ESA SP-575). pp. 154,
2004.
Eﬁmov, A.I., Chashei, I.V., Bird, M.K., Plettemeier, D., Edenhofer, P.,
Wohlmuth, R., Samoznaev, L.N., Lukanina, L.A. Turbulence of the
inner solar wind at solar maximum: Coronal radio sounding with
Galileo in 1999/2000. Adv. Space Res. 36, 1448–1453, 2005.
Gosling, J.T., Skoug, R.M., McComas, D.J., Smith, C.W. Direct evidence
for magnetic reconnection in the solar wind near 1 AU. J. Geophys.
Res. 110, 1107, 2005.
Gosling, J.T., Eriksson, S., Schwenn, R. Petschek-type magnetic reconnection exhausts in the solar wind well inside 1 AU: helios. J. Geophys.
Res. 111, A10102, 2006a.
Gosling, J.T., Eriksson, S., Skoug, R.M., McComas, D.J., Forsyth, R.J.
Petschek-type reconnection exhausts in the solar wind well beyond
1 AU: Ulysses. ApJ 644, 613–621, 2006b.
Gurnett, D.A., Huﬀ, R.L., Kirchner, D.L. The wide-band plasma wave
investigation. Space Sci. Rev. 79, 195–208, 1997.
Gustafsson, G., Bostrom, R., Holback, B., Holmgren, G., Lundgren,
A., Stasiewicz, K., Ahlen, L., Mozer, F.S., Pankow, D., Harvey,
P., Berg, P., Ulrich, R., Pedersen, A., Schmidt, R., Butler, A.,
Fransen, A.W.C., Klinge, D., Thomsen, M., Falthammar, C.-G.,
Lindqvist, P.-A., Christenson, S., Holtet, J., Lybekk, B., Sten,
T.A., Tanskanen, P., Lappalainen, K., Wygant, J. The electric ﬁeld
and wave experiment for the cluster mission. Space Sci. Rev. 79,
137–156, 1997.
Harvey, P., Mozer, F.S., Pankow, D., Wygant, J., Maynard, N.C., Singer,
H., Sullivan, W., Anderson, P.B., Pfaﬀ, R., Aggson, T., Pedersen, A.,
Falthammar, C.-G., Tanskannen, P. The electric ﬁeld instrument on
the polar satellite. Space Sci. Rev. 71, 583–596, 1995.
Kellogg, P.J., Bale, S.D., Mozer, F.S., Horbury, T.S., Reme, H. Solar
wind electric ﬁelds in the ion cyclotron frequency range. ApJ 645,
704–710, 2006.

A. Vaivads et al. / Advances in Space Research 39 (2007) 1502–1509
Knock, S.A., Cairns, I.H., Robinson, P.A., Kuncic, Z. Theoretically
predicted properties of type II radio emission from an interplanetary
foreshock. J. Geophys. Res. 108, 1–6, 2003.
Leamon, R.J., Matthaeus, W.H., Smith, C.W., Zank, G.P., Mullan, D.J.,
Oughton, S. MHD-driven kinetic dissipation in the solar wind and
corona. ApJ 537, 1054–1062, 2000.
Lin, J., Ko, Y.-K., Sui, L., Raymond, J.C., Stenborg, G.A., Jiang, Y.,
Zhao, S., Mancuso, S. Direct observations of the magnetic reconnection site of an eruption on 2003 November 18. ApJ622, 1251–1264,
2005.
Marsch, E., Tu, C.-Y. Spectral and spatial evolution of compressible
turbulence in the inner solar wind. J. Geophys. Res. 95, 11945–11956,
1990.
Marsch, E., Marsden, R., Harrison, R., Wimmer-Schweingruber, R.,
Fleck, B. Solar Orbiter – mission proﬁle, main goals and present
status. Adv. Space Res. 36, 1360–1366, 2005.
Maynard, N.C. Electric Field Measurements in Moderate to High Density
Space Plasmas with Passive Double Probes. In: Measurement Techniques in Space Plasmas – Fields (Geophysical Monograph 103).
American Geophysical Union, p. 13, 1998.
Pedersen, A., Mozer, F., Gustafsson, G. Electric Field Measurements in a
Tenuous Plasma with Spherical Double Probes. In: Robert F. Pfaﬀ,

1509

J.E.B., Young., D.T. (Eds.), Measurement Techniques in Space
Plasmas – Fields (Geophysical Monograph 103). American Geophysical Union, p. 1, 1998.
Schwenn, R., Marsch, E. Physics of the Inner Heliosphere II. Particles,
Waves and Turbulence, XI, 352 pp. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg
New York. Also Physics and Chemistry in Space, 152 ﬁgs. Volume 21;
2, 1991.
Vaivads, A., Retinò, A., André, M. Microphysics of magnetic reconnection. Space Sci. Rev. 122, 19–27, 2006.
Wang, C., Du, D., Richardson, J.D. Characteristics of the interplanetary
coronal mass ejections in the heliosphere between 0.3 and 5.4 AU. J.
Geophys. Res. 110, 10107, 2005.

Further readings
Solar Orbiter payload deﬁnition document (PDD), ESA SCI-A/2004/175/
AO, Issue 5, 31 March 2006, ESA-ESTEC, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 2006.
Solar Orbiter science requirements document (SRD), ESA SCI-SH/2005/
100/RGM, Issue 1, 31 March 2005, ESA-ESTEC, Noordwijk, The
Netherlands, 2005.

